Biggest mistakes

Microsoft Word
1. Using multiple returns or spaces or tabs to align text.
1. Not knowing the use of tabs 
2. Not using styles for formatting
3. Using empty lines to adjust the spacing between paragraphs
4. Not knowing the use of page/section breaks 
5. Doing text formatting with the buttons on the home ribbon 
6. Outlook. 3

Microsoft Excel 
1. Lack of documentation and explanations 
2. Slow and over-complicated workbooks 
3. Using volatile functions such as INDIRECT and OFFSET 
4. Using VLOOKUP
5. Using merged cells
6. Duplicated or unnecessary calculations 
7. Bad file names and worksheet names 
8. illogical flow of worksheets 
9. Isolated blocks of cells 
10. Using manual calculation mode

VBA with Microsoft Excel
1. Complicated VBA codes due to bad spreadsheet design
2. No descriptions about what a button does
3. No error handling 
4. Non-reusable codes and functions 
5. Doing things that are easily done by human
6. using ActiveSheet, Select
7. Hardcoding range address in VBA code
8. Occupying Windows clipboard when paste format isn't needed
9. Bad function/sub names or bad module names
10. Lack of validation cells

Microsoft PowerPoint 
1. Too many words in slides (30 words are too much)
2. Boring presentations 
3. Not establishing and emphasizing the overall structure 
4. Not using slide masters for formatting 
5. Abusing "clip arts"
6. Type everything in the PowerPoint or treat the PowerPoint file as a complete document 7. Trying to be interactive with a wrong group of audience 
7. Outlook.3
8. Overrun
9. Trying to be interactive with the wrong group of audience  
 

Microsoft Outlook 
1. Replying unrelated stuff in a same conversation with a bad subject 
2. Writing long emails without focus 
3. Include text or numbers in emails as a picture (to preserve formatting or whatever )
4. Forgetting to attach files 
5. Bad folder structures
6. Bad subjects: too general or too long
7. Respond to phishing emails
8. Sending attachments that are too large
