PowerPoint skill
vba library + article
links 
chart formatting - menu options with corresponding effects on charts
defined names

advanced topics
shared workbooks
connection to database
table

Powerpoint skills 
Most of us probably had some lessons on Powerpoint before in colleges.
 However those you learnt are often not what we should learn about presentations.
 
1. Powerpoint is for presentation, not as a document with paragraphs.

2. As few words as possible
Do not put all the content into the slides. As mentioned in the first point, slides only assist the preaentation.
If all the words are put in the slides, the presenter is "useless"
Or think in this way: as an audience, how many times have you been struggling to read the words or to listen to the speaker? 
20 words are a suggested limit for each slide.

3. Make sure the audience follow the agenda

4. Use slide master instead of slide-by-slide customizations

use PowerPoint templates which suit the topic and the style of the presentation. 
the preset templates have been boring. Presenters should find new template on the internet or create custom ones.

5. Use clip arts only when they accurately represent the ideas
2007 clip arts is boring
create custom ones
clip art shapes can make sentences split into lines in an awkward way.


6. Utilize dual screen setup
If a dual screen setup is possible, the secondary non-projected screen can be used to show notes of the slides, previous and next frames, and the time elapsed of the presentation. 
Such feature is available in the common presentation software 

7. Attachments (videos)
downloading attachments first,
avoid connection to internet just for view of documents

8. clarity of words and pictures 
notice on the font size and clarity, especially on attachments
avoid putting words at the bottom of the slides. The bottom part of the screen may be blocked by other audience.


9. Right way to switch to a particular slide 
In the Q&A sessions, the presenter often needs to refer to previous slides. 
Searching through the slides does not appear pleasant to the audience.
know the correct way to switch to other pages in powerpoint

3.
ensure the audience can follow the flow of your presentation, know where you are
-- although an agenda is shown, audience will forget it soon
-- even if you add the flow in every page, audience can get lost easily when you dig into sub-sections, sub-sub-sections and sub-sub-sub-sections

10. Use of short forms and technical terms 
Whenever you use short forms or technical terms, make sure you have considered the audience's background. Explain clearly if necessary

1.
Think about how people talk without presentation softwares. Powerpoint is not used to hold your content, but to ASSIST your presentation.
The complete content should be typed neatly using a word processor such as MS Word. Powerpoint is surely not for that purpose.
We don't separate content and paragraphs to frames in documents. It reduces the readability. 

7.
Do not embed videos in your presentation as it makes your powerpoint unnecessarily large. Videos should be shown separately
(tbc)

5.
Do not include useless images, icons or photos. It makes no sense. Simple is beauty
