Volatile functions
Avoid INDIRECT()! It makes workbook calculation slow.
WHAT ARE VOLATILE FUNCTIONS
According to ??, volatile functions in cells are re-calculated even when the depending cells are unchanged. Commonly used volatile functions include INDIRECT, OFFSET, ROW, COLUMN, RAND, NOW. (INDIRECT is the mostly (mis)used volatile function!)
[Exhibit]
To make volatile functions clearer, let's consider the function RAND(), which generates a random number between 0 and 1. 
With the calculation mode set to automatic, the cells with RAND() change their values whenever any cells are edited - This behaviour is different from other functions which "cache" the values of dependent cells and know if the cells have to be updated.
What it means is these functions get recalculated all the time although their precedents do not change. On the contrary??, Excel knows not to recalculate a non-volatile formulae in a cell when it sees that none of its precedents are modified.
The ... (drawbacks of volatile functions).
[Link to file demonstration - CURRDATE() as a UDF to illustrate recalculation]
Setting calculation to manual seems to help a bit (while creating another problem due to manual calculation), but those volatile functions are marked to be re-calculated whenever any cell is changed. It still slows down the calculation time. Such "solution" is only to avoid the drawback, but not to solve the problem.
You can refer to this demo for a simple comparison of the calculation time. The difference is significant even the calculation mode is set to manual.
[Link to file comparing vlookup and indirect]
SOLUTION
There are several possible solutions to volatile functions:
1. Replace volatile functions by non-volatile functions or manual input - I believe using manual inputed cells with clear instructions is better than using volatile functions
2. Re-organize the spreadsheets to avoid using INDIRECT. 
Many people put the same kind of data in different worksheets, for example each worksheet stores the data of one month. This is a common mistake in worksheet design. In this example all the data should be put in one single worksheet with an indicator of the month.
3. Use a well-written VBA program or a non-volatile user-defined function (UDF) for the same purpose.
An example is a workbook which involves the use of random numbers. Using the function RAND() causes the workbook to recalculate upon any kind of edit. Therefore it should be avoided by creating a simple VBA program which fills a specified range with random numbers from 0 to 1. 
[Exhibit2: solution of
 worksheets by grouping instead of functions or to one worksheet]
Reference: www.decisionmodels.com/calcsecretsi.htm
ms official website
Remarks: using INDIRECT function causes the worksheet to suffer from another serious problem: layout-logic dependency.
Add the reference from Microsoft
